# quantifying-resilience-in-psychological-systems
From a complexity perspective, many psychological phenomena can be characterized as transitions between multiple stable states, such as relapse in depression or radicalization in attitudes. Transitions can result from perturbations, and are more likely to occur when the resilience of the state is low. Mean exit time quantifies resilience as the anticipated time for the system to transition out of a certain state and has recently been successfully applied to empirical data in ecology. However, the robustness of the method under varying conditions and how it compares to existing resilience metrics has not been systematically examined. Via a simulation study, we investigate the performance of mean exit time, potential depth, basin width, and variance around the maxima in capturing changes in resilience while varying crucial factors such as time series length, sampling frequency, and noise intensity. We find that differences in resilience between states can be more accurately quantified from empirically reconstructed system dynamics compared to directly from the obtained probability distribution, although low time series length and sampling frequency have a detrimental effect on the performance of mean exit time and potential depth. We also find that all studied metrics, even if theoretically noise-independent, can be highly sensitive to noise intensity in practice, with lower noise leading to fewer observed transitions, and thus lower accuracy and reliability of the metrics. The effect of noise and number of transitions on the examined approach potentially limit the application of these metrics for psychological data, where observed transitions can be far and far between.


